Operator Precedence and Associativity.
We'll extend our discussion of operators
to discuss these two very important terms.
But precedence and associativity,
those again are some of those big
words that describe things that are a lot
simpler then what they sound like.
Big word alert.
First of all, operator precedence.
Operator precedence just means which
operator function gets called first.
And there's more then one on
the same line of executable code.
And functions then are called
an order of precedence.
The higher precedence wins so
if I have more then one operator,
the JavaScript engine will call or
invoke the operator with the higher
precedence first, or the highest,
and then down the line from there.
We'll see an example in just a bit.
But before we do that,
we need to add on one more concept
that goes along with this.
We mentioned it operator associativity.
Yeah, another big word alert.
It's not as complex as it sounds either.
Associativity.
That's what order
an operator gets called in.
So again we're talking about which
operator function in what order.
In this case, either left to right
associativity, or call left associativity.
Or right to left.
Which is called right associativity.
And this means when the operator
functions have the same precedence.
So if I have a bunch of
operators on a line of code,
the precedence tells me which
ones gets called first.
But if I have some of them, they all have
the same precedence, then what do I do?
Well, depending on the associativity of
that operator, we're either going to call
the functions left to right, or
we'll call the functions right to left.
Alright, let's look at some examples.
Alright, so let's say I'm going
to have another calculation here.
And I'm going to say three plus
four times five and output this.
Now what do you think
the answer is going to be?
Well if you remember from mathematics
class, there is an order,
a precedence in mathematics in
general to these operators.
And JavaScript does the same thing,
because there's one of two options.
These are two function calls, and
remember JavaScript it synchronous,
so it's not going to try
to do this simultaneously.
It's gonna call one, and
then call the other.
But which one gets called first.
Well first of all,
we'll start with operator precedence.
And in order to answer this question,
we need to know what the operator
precedence is in JavaScript.
There's a terrific link which
I'll provide in the next lecture.
On the Mozilla Developer Network or
MDN That's
developer.mozilla.org, called
operator precedence for JavaScript.
And it actually has a table
of operator precedence.
What I've done is taken this table and
provided you a PDF.
Which you can download, it's attached
to this lecture for download, and
we'll use this PDF to discuss this.
So again remember that
what's happening is,
these are two functions,
operators are special types of functions.
And so the one with the higher
precedence gets called first.
So, the bigger the number on this table,
that means the one with the biggest number
will get called first and the second
biggest number will get called second.
Etcetera.
Until all of the operators are done.
So, if I go done to
this section of the PDF
to explain what these little symbols
here mean, this is the operator.
There are a large number
of operators in JavaScript,
you can see them all in this PDF.
These three dots just mean
other code around it.
So in this case multiplication
is an asterisk,
division, addition,
subtraction, remainder.
And then there's this code around it.
So a left parameter and
a right parameters.
So these are the parameters
being passed to that function.
So in my sample I have multiplication and
addition.
Notice that multiplication
has a precedence of 14,
and addition has a precedence of 13.
And with operator precedence
the higher one gets called first.
So multiplication is higher,
has a higher precedence than addition.
That means that what's going to
happen is this will get called first.
And remember that this returns a value.
So, what's really happening
is four times five is run.
This operator function is invoked and
returns 20.
Four times five.
And then,
because this has the lower precedence,
this is called using that returned
value as the second parameter.
And so that's called, and it's 23.
Equals is also an operator.
And, essentially, what we're doing,
is setting a equal to 23.
If the precedence was difference,
then it would do three plus four.
If that was first, that would be seven.
And seven times five is 35.
So we end up with as35.
So the precedence makes a big
difference in the value we get.
23, if times or
multiplication has the higher precedence.
And 35.
If addition has the higher precedence, but
we've already seen that multiplication has
the higher precedence in JavaScript so
when I run this I get 23.
I get 23 because this function
is called first and I get a 20.
And then this function is called and
I get a 23.
Make sense?
That's a very important
concept to understand.
Some of the strange bugs or
things that look weird,
anyway, that can happen to people
when writing JavaScript code.
Now what if more than one operator, and
I could have many in a row,
has the same associativity?
Let's go back to our table.
Notice that in some cases, for
example, multiplication, division, and
remainder, All have
the same associativity, or
I could have the same
operator on one line of code.
Well let's take a moment and look at this.
I'm gonna change what I'm doing here.
I'm gonna say var a = 2, and
var b = 3, and c = 4.
So I now have three variables,
with three different values.
And then, I'm going to run a statement.
a = b = c.
And then I'll console.log all
of these three variables.
All right, let's look at this.
I have three different values, and
then I'm setting a = b = c.
So in the end they should all be equal but
the question is,
what value will they all have
when I have console.log this?
Will they all be two, will they all
be three, or will they all be four?
What do you think?
Take a look at the results when I refresh.
They're all equal to four.
Why?
Because of associativity.
That's this column here.
And the table.
Associativity is either left associativity
meaning the furthest one to the left,
the furthest operator to
the left will be called first.
Or right to left or right associativity.
Meaning the operator furthest to
the right will be called first, and
that's really it.
Pretty simple.
All right, so the operator I'm
using is the equals operator or
the assignment of equal,
it's one of the assignment operators.
Notice that it's associativity.
Is right to left.
So, the equals operator
is right associative.
It has right to left associativity.
Meaning that,
when I have it on a single line,
since it's the same precedence, it then
looks at the associativity to decide.
Which one should be called first?
So it goes to the furthest
one to the right,
because it's right to left associativity.
So it'll call this one first.
If it was left to right associativity,
we'd call this one first,
cuz that's farthest to the left.
But no, it's right to left.
So this is furthest to
the right on this line.
And so it caused this.
So it will set b equal to c and what is c?
Four.
Now here's the interesting thing.
We said that operators generally take
two parameters and return a value.
So, the plus operator returned the value
of the addition of the two parameters.
But, what does equals return?
All right,
let's go back to our console window.
I'm gonna set b equal to c.
So, it will run this operator,
and the console window will
show me the return value.
See the method or
the function call that was invoked.
It did the work of setting the value and
memory of b equal to the value and
memory of c.
And then returned the value of
the parameter on the right,
the parameter that we're setting equal to.
So it gave me back a four.
So this statement
actually returns a value.
It's a function that returns a value.
So that means I can call it in order.
So since this is right
to left associativity,
this is furthest to the left,
this is furthest to the right.
This is called first.
It sets B equal to four because C is four,
and returns a four.
And then this will be called.
So A will simply be set equal to four
because that's what this returned.
A is 4.
So, when this is done calling,
first This operator then this operator,
against the returned value A, B and
C are all equal to four.
Makes sense?
That's operator precedence and
associativity precedence helps us
determine which functions run first and
so does associativity.
Associativity comes into play when two or
more operators have the same precedence.
So, if an operator has precedence 14 and
another one 13, 14 gets run first.
But if they both have 13 or some other
value, then it's either left to right or
right to left.
And we can see this in action if we
go back to our original example where
we said a was equal to
three plus four times five.
Like that, something like that.
So this ended up being 23 because
precedent said four times five,
20 plus three.
But notice in our operator precedence
table what's at the very top
of the precedence table.
It's called grouping and that means I
can put something inside parentheses.
That's our special operator in this case
and unlike some of these other operators
it simply takes whatever
is inside of it and says.
Run this first.
So, whatever's in the parens
always gets executed first.
Those functions get called first.
So if I put three plus four in
parentheses, now, what's going to happen?
Well, JavaScript looks, and
sees that parentheses have.
A level 19, highest possible precedence.
And so runs this function
that's inside of it first.
A plus, and then three plus four is seven,
and we'll then multiply that times five.
So if I run this I get 35.
Without the parentheses
the precedence rule says, well,
this has a higher precedence than plus,
and so I get 23.
With the parens it changes the order
that the functions are executed and
that's all it's really doing.
So, operator precedence and associativity.
Got that?
This is important again,
because JavaScript is dynamically
typed and we'll see that very soon.